Modification and extension of pd-overview-repro.md (#3169)
the-turing-way/the-turing-way: book/website/project-design/pd-overview/pd-overview-repro.md

(pd-overview-repro)=
# Collaborative project documentation

Good communication and collaboration practices are complementary to research reproducibility, and often it is hard to separate these concepts from each other.
In _The Turing Way_, we consider these essential for reproducible research and provide separate guides for {ref}`communication<cm>` and {ref}`collaboration<cl>`.

In this page, we highlight some of the most important recommendations for collaboration and communication to ensure that you, and everyone else in your project, understand what the project is about, who the stakeholders are and how they can participate.
You can visit specific chapters to gain an in-depth understanding and selection of practices that meet the specific requirements in your project.

## Minimal documentation

> Your open source project (research, software or hardware) should at a minimum provide a license together with a README file with all the basic, general information a newcomer needs to get oriented.

Reviewer: Is it `research, software, or hardware` or `research, [whether] software or hardware`.

Author: ```suggestion
Your open source project  should at a minimum provide a license together with a README file with all the basic, general information a newcomer needs to get oriented.
The license to apply will depend on your type of research output (text, data, software, hardware, reagents to name a few).
See the license chapter {ref}`rr-licensing`
```

Reviewer: There's a double space between `project` and `should`, but iirc that should be disregarded by the rendering process
.

It should contain a **recognizable name** for your project, as well as a **declaration of the licensing terms** under which it may be distributed (see the {ref}`OH_licences` chapter).

Documentation should be shared via centralised, findable and accessible platforms.

## Documenting project plans and processes
 
Document the **current state**, **ongoing development**, and/or any **future plans** for the project.
Add information on available resources and recommended practices to ensure everyone is on the same page (literally!).
It may also be important to make it clear what your project is not meant to be.

> In addition to the above, it is interesting to document the *principal need* for your project, especially for software and hardware project: what problem are you planning to solve ?

Reviewer: planning -> trying.

Or just `What issue lead you to creating it`.

That includes a **problem description** of whatever issue sparked the project, a **functional description** of how your project is meant to address it, and a **context description** of the users and environment your project is targeting. 

It is particularly important to share the **vision, mission and milestones** clearly. 
Provide sufficient information for what the expected outcomes and deliverables are.

Provide overarching as well as short-term goals and describe expected outcomes to help contributors move away from focusing on a single idea of the feature.
Describe the possible expansion of features in pre-determined and agreed on ways at stages beyond the initial implementation.

## Project's "Who-is-Who"

Include a **list of contributors**, **contribution guidelines**, and information on **contact points** where to ask for help.
In addition, 

> create a directory to highlight the different stakeholders with their roles in the project, keys skills, interests and contact information (when possible).

Reviewer: `interests, and contact information`

Author: ```suggestion
create a directory to highlight the different people and organisation that might get involved, indicate their roles in the project, keys skills, interests, and contact information (when possible).
```

Author: It was in the initial text, but would change it anyway.

Reviewer: Yeah, best to merge `list of contributors` and `directory of stakeholders` into one. Maybe something like

```
Include a **directory of contributors** with their roles in the project, **contribution guidelines**, and information on **contact points** where to ask for help (when possible).
```

I think contributor skills and interests aren't static enough to warrant placing it in documentation, and contact information is already covered by contact points imho.

Author: It is actually a bit different, "stakeholders" also represent people who will/may never "contribute" to the project. Think "doctors who will only look at the picture taken from a flexure microscope" for example. Their needs should be taken into account, but they are not contributors.

"keys skills" refers to skills important for this project, probably quite static.
I would keep it simple here, do you think we should link to https://the-turing-way.netlify.app/collaboration/stakeholder-engagement.html?

Author: I asked for more feedback on slack, let's see.

Reviewer: We've talked about this in the past Julien and I do agree with reason (1), but as mentioned then, reason (2) is more complicated [than you state](https://www.fasttrackimpact.com/post/why-we-shouldn-t-banish-the-word-stakeholder) here and further discussion on that should happen in a separate issue imho (if necessary), as the word is already being used in The Turing Way as is.

In my view what we need to differentiate is whether we want to document actual people or personas / roles. For contributors we document actual people, but w.r.t. your example about doctors, as the one creating the project documentation they may exist only theoretically to you at that point. How about phrasing it as such:

```
In addition, it helps to create an overview of different possible stakeholder personas and how they may interact with the project.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Create an overview of  different putative "personas" {ref}`pd-persona` (people and organisations) and how they may interact with the project. 
```

Describe what opportunities for collaboration different members will have.
When possible, such as in an open source project, provide these details for those outside the current group, especially when you want to encourage people outside the project to be involved.
Communicate the work culture that you want to promote and policies that ensures the safety and security of both your data and people.

Provide resources on ways of working to ensure fair participation of contributors who collaborate on short- and long-term milestones within the project.

> It reduces or addresses concerns about the project's progress towards meeting goals and prevents potential fallout between project contributors.

Reviewer: `prevents` -> `may mitigate`

Author: original text, I would keep it as it is, as the changes are not crucial to the discourse (any concerns are meant I think)

## Participation and contribution process

 In order to make your project discoverable, you may add a machine-readable metadata file, such as an [Open-Know-How manifest](https://www.internetofproduction.org/openknowhow).

Considering the variety of different backgrounds and skills your members bring, describe how they can participate and start contributing.
You should also **think about your audience**. Your project might be reused by people with different skills, roles, objectives, and socio-economic and cultural environments.

> Provide clear opportunities for contributions, review, management, mentoring and support.

Reviewer: `mentoring, and support`

(pd-overview-repro)=
# Collaborative project documentation

Good communication and collaboration practices are complementary to research reproducibility, and often it is hard to separate these concepts from each other.
In _The Turing Way_, we consider these essential for reproducible research and provide separate guides for {ref}`communication<cm>` and {ref}`collaboration<cl>`.

In this page, we highlight some of the most important recommendations for collaboration and communication to ensure that you, and everyone else in your project, understand what the project is about, who the stakeholders are and how they can participate.
You can visit specific chapters to gain an in-depth understanding and selection of practices that meet the specific requirements in your project.

## Minimal documentation

Your open source project should at a minimum provide a license together with a README file with all the basic, general information a newcomer needs to get oriented.
The license to apply will depend on your type of research output (text, data, software, hardware, reagents to name a few).
See the license chapter {ref}`rr-licensing`

> It should contain a **recognizable name** for your project, as well as a **declaration of the licensing terms** under which it may be distributed (see the {ref}`OH_licences` chapter).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It should contain a **recognizable name** for your project, as well as a **declaration of the licensing terms** under which it may be distributed (see the {ref}`rr-licensing` chapter).
```
`OH_licences` doesn't exist and is causing thir PR to fail CI currently. Did you mean `rr-licensing`?

Reviewer 2: Ohhhh I see now that it will presumably be introduced in #3148...

Author: yep indeed waiting for 3148 to be merged, but that one needs some reviews. thanks for the review!

> It should contain a **recognizable name** for your project, as well as a **declaration of the licensing terms** under which it may be distributed (see the {ref}`OH_licences` chapter).

Author: ```suggestion
It should contain a **recognizable name** for your project, as well as a **declaration of the licensing terms** under which it may be distributed (see the {ref}`rr-licensing-hardware` chapter).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
